okay check in security screening
boarding and you finally get to your
seat the pilot revs the engines
and you see everything out of the window
pass by faster and faster
suddenly the horizon is diagonal and you
feel like your heart just
dropped into your stomach why do pilots
take off so steeply
it's as if the giant metallic bird is
getting a running start
and then jumps up in the air like it's
slam dunking a basketball well
the whole thing actually comes down to
physics and those uniquely shaped wings
they have a flat bottom and a curved top
this creates a difference in air
pressure less on the top
and more on the underside means all
those unseen air molecules
under the wing can push it up but this
doesn't explain
why the pilot seems to pull the yoke
back so suddenly during takeoff
knowledge of the laws of physics is not
enough here
the pilot should always look at the
runway its length and location
if you think your takeoff was too steep
fly to the princess juliana airport on
the island of sinmartan
better yet have a rest on maho beach
your caribbean getaway might look
something like this
you're lying there on the beautiful
white sand sipping on a glass of
lemonade or something
you close your eyes take in a deep
breath of that
salty sea air when wash
your eyes spring open to see an airplane
passing by
right above your head you feel like you
can reach up and touch it
the airwave is so strong it blows all
your stuff away
and sends what's left of your beverage
right onto your lap
yes the runway to this airport is just
300 feet from the beach
a minutes walk now imagine a plane
taking off from it
and having to pull the belly up or wind
up ruining
everyone's beach fun or let's head over
to the nearby
wancho e rosquin airport on sabah
another dutch caribbean island with
limited space
some call the runway here the world's
shortest it's about 1
7 the length of most commercial runways
on one side there are high mountains and
on the other
the sea and cliffs pilots understand
that landing or taking off
they may go beyond the runway and end up
taking a swim
but it gets even more extreme
at the old mariscal sucra airport in
quito
the runways were wedged between active
volcanoes
imagine looking out the window to see
lava spewing up on both sides of you
nothing like that happen of course we'll
save stuff like that for the movies
but the landings were tough even for
experienced pilots
and takeoffs also had to be steep
because of the surrounding mountains
and since the air is so thin at that
altitude
even pulling the yoke back didn't mean
the airplane would gain enough height in
time
and still all takeoffs pull up suddenly
even at perfectly normal airports with
long enough runways and plenty of
wide open space there you are press back
in your seat
looking out the window at the diagonal
horizon
from the pilot's point of view
everything is different during takeoff
let's rewind
okay the cockpit crew waits for the okay
from the dispatcher
they need to get that bad boy off the
ground as quickly and as fast as
possible
because other flights are waiting to
take off as well
then there's that limited runway space
even if it's in the normal range for
length
you still need to get something half as
heavy as a house
up into the air using well the physics
of air
add to that the need to avoid clipping
any surrounding buildings trees towers
and so on
and you get the picture it turns out
that pilots take off steeply
not to scare passengers but because it's
necessary
but why can't landings be just as quick
ever notice how the pilot informs
everyone that
we're about to land yet you're on the
ground 20 or more minutes
later steep landings would save time
fuel and all the necessities
yeah if only the earth's gravity pulls
everything toward the ground right so
it's much easier to fall than to lift
off and go against that force
the pilot's job is to glide the machine
down gently
so it doesn't hit the runway too hard if
the crew in the cockpit can bring it in
slowly
they won't need to apply the brakes too
harshly and possibly
pop a tire or start a fire think of it
this way
when you come to a red traffic light you
don't hit the brake
when you get to the light you see the
yellow light up ahead
release your foot off the gas pedal
coast a bit
and then slowly and gently push that
brake
oh you don't do that well you should try
it sometime
otherwise you'll probably not be able to
stop on time
and you'd see blue and red lights in
your rear view mirror
only i imagine flying a plane is a
little more challenging than driving a
car
so give all the pilots out there a round
of applause
okay that's enough but hey if you don't
like the sharp tilt of the plane during
takeoff
just get around by helicopter no being
pushed back in your seat
no sudden diagonal horizons now you
feel yourself gently lifted higher and
higher
the ground beneath you gets further away
and people become
ants below you hope you're not afraid of
heights
or loud noises because those chopper
blades are deafening
planes and helicopters have one thing in
common
they need to generate lift helicopters
do that a little differently
and over a much smaller area hence why
helipads are so compact compared to
runways
starting the engine the pilot causes the
rotor to spin
and it holds the blades let's look at
those blades a little closer
not too close notice how they also have
that curvature on the top
and they're flat on the bottom you get
that air pressure difference again
when there are enough air molecules
under the blade to outweigh the machine
you get lift you'd also be spinning out
of control if the helicopter didn't have
a crucial part
the tail rotor it also has blades that
spin
and push the tail in the opposite
direction the body wants to turn
complicated i know another round of
applause for the chopper pilots and
engineers
now just be glad you're not flying
leonardo dicaprio's helicopter
i mean leonardo da vinci's helicopter
you and three of your friends would have
to turn the blades yourself
you'd have to work your whole body to
generate enough lift to get this thing
off the ground and keep it up and just
look how far we've come
since the 15th century now we have
rockets that blast off the ground and a
beautiful
fiery display the rocket goes further
and further into the atmosphere
but you notice one thing it's not going
in a straight line up
it leaves a bright trail shaped like a
rainbow as if it's going to land in a
distant city
surprisingly this curved trajectory is
precisely
so something like that doesn't happen if
the rocket flies up
in a straight line it'll run out of fuel
before it reaches space
remember air is made of molecules and
those act on
objects just like your hand can push
something off your table
so the rocket has to break through the
air as strange as it sounds
it leans to one side so that too much
air doesn't gather at its nose
and try to push it back down toward the
surface where gravity is also pulling
the thing down
from planes to rockets yeah it felt like
a random leap
but the two have a lot in common nasa
used
two modified boeing 747s as space
shuttle carrier planes
as much as i'd like to imagine the jumbo
jets catching the space shuttle as it
glided toward the ground
the 747s were just used to transport the
ships back to the launch complex
after they landed unfortunately they
don't fly anymore
because they have since retired ah
retirement
but you can still look at one of them at
the space center in houston
it's got a mock-up independence the
shuttle on top of the 747
for that real wow effect